The following is a conversation with Manolis Kellis, his third
time on the podcast. He is a professor at MIT and head of the
MIT Computational Biology Group. This time, we went deep on the
science, biology and genetics. So this is a bit of an experiment.
Manolis went back and forth between the basics of biology
to the latest state of the art in the research. He's a master
at this. So I just sat back and enjoyed the ride. This
conversation happened at 7am. So it's yet another podcast
episode after an all nighter for me. And once again, since the
universe has a sense of humor, this one was a tough one for my
brain to keep up. But I did my best and I never shy away from
good challenge. Quick mention of a sponsor followed by some
thoughts related to the episode. First is SEM Rush, the most
advanced SEO optimization tool I've ever come across. I don't
like looking at numbers. But someone probably should. It helps
you make good decisions. Second is pessimist archive. They're
back. One of my favorite history podcasts on why people resist
new things from recorded music to umbrellas to cars, chess,
coffee, and the elevator. Third is 8 Sleep, a mattress that
cools itself, measures heart rate variability, has an app, and
has given me yet another reason to look forward to sleep,
including the all important power nap. And finally, better
help online therapy when you want to face your demons with a
licensed professional, not just by doing the David Goggins like
physical challenges like I seem to do on occasion. Please
check out the sponsors in the description to get a discount
and to support this podcast. As a side note, let me say that
biology in the brain and in the various systems of the body
fill me with awe. Every time I think about how such a
chaotic mess coming from its humble origins in the ocean
was able to achieve such incredibly complex and robust
mechanisms of life that survived despite all the forces of
nature that want to destroy it. It is so unlike the computing
systems we humans have engineered that it makes me feel
that in order to create artificial general intelligence
and artificial consciousness, we may have to completely
rethink how we engineer computational systems. If you
enjoy this thing, subscribe on YouTube, review it with
Five Stars and Apple Podcasts, follow on Spotify, support on
Patreon, or connect with me on Twitter at Lex Freedman. And
now here's my conversation with Manolis Callis. So your group
at MIT is trying to understand the molecular basis of human
disease. What are some of the biggest challenges in your
view? Don't get me started. I mean understanding human
disease is the most complex challenge in modern science.
So because human disease is as complex as the human genome,
it is as complex as the human brain. And it is in many ways
even more complex because the more we understand disease
complexity, the more we start understanding genome
complexity and epigenome complexity and brain
circuitry complexity and immune system complexity and
cancer complexity and so on and so forth. So traditionally,
human disease was following basic biology. You would
basically understand basic biology in model organisms
like, you know, mouse and fly and yeast. You would
understand sort of mammalian biology and animal
biology and eukaryotic biology in sort of progressive layers
of complexity getting closer to human phylogenetically.
And you would do perturbation experiments in those species
to see if I knock out a gene, what happens.
And based on the knocking out of these genes, you would
basically then have a way to drive human biology
because you would you would sort of understand the functions of these
genes and then if you find that a human gene
locus, something that you've mapped from human genetics
to that gene is related to a particular human disease, you
say, aha, now I know the function of the gene from the model organisms.
I can now go and understand the function of that gene
in human. But this is all changing. This is
dramatically changed. So that that was the old way of doing basic biology. You
would start with the animal models, the eukaryotic models,
the mammalian models, and then you would go to human.
Human genetics has been so transformed in the last
decade or two that human genetics is now actually
driving the basic biology. There is more genetic mutation information
in the human genome than there will ever be in any other species.
What do you mean by mutation information? So so perturbations is how you
understand systems. So an engineer builds systems
and then they know how they work from the inside out. A scientist
studies systems through perturbations. You basically say if I poke that balloon
what's going to happen and I'm going to film it in super high resolution
understand I don't know air dynamics or fluid dynamics if it's filled with water
etc. So you can then make experimentation by
perturbation and then the scientific process is sort of
building models that best fit the data designing you
experiments that best test your models and challenge your models and so on and so
forth. That's the same thing with science. Basically if you're trying to
understand biological science you basically want to do perturbations that
then drive the models. So how do these perturbations
allow you to understand disease? So if if you know that
a gene is related to disease you don't want to just know that it's related to
the disease. You want to know what is the disease mechanism because you want to
go and intervene. So the way that I like to describe it is that
traditionally epidemiology which is basically the study of disease
you know sort of the observational study of disease
has been about correlating one thing with another thing.
So if you if you have a lot of people with liver disease who are also
alcoholics you might say well maybe the alcoholism is
driving the liver disease or maybe those who have liver disease
self medicate with alcohol so that the connection could be either way.
With genetic epidemiology it's about correlating changes in genome
with phenotypic differences and then you know the direction of causality.
So if you know that a particular gene is related to the disease
you can basically say okay perturbing that gene in mouse
causes the mice to have x phenotype. So perturbing that gene in human causes
the humans to have the disease so I can now figure out what are the
detailed molecular phenotypes in the human that are related to
that organismal phenotype in the disease. So it's all
about understanding disease mechanism, understanding what are the pathways,
what are the tissues, what are the processes
that are associated with the disease so that we know how to intervene.
You can then prescribe particular medications that also alter these processes.
You can prescribe lifestyle changes that also affect these processes
and so on so forth. That's such a beautiful puzzle to try to solve
like what kind of perturbations eventually have this ripple effect that
leads to disease across the population and then you
study that for animals, a mice first and then see how that might possibly
connect to humans. How hard is that puzzle of
trying to figure out how little perturbations might lead to
in a stable way to a disease? In animals we make the puzzle
simpler because we perturb one gene at a time.
That's the beauty and that's the power of animal models. You can basically
decouple the perturbations. You only do one
perturbation and you only do strong perturbations at a time. In human the
puzzle is incredibly complex because obviously you don't do
human experimentation. You wait for natural selection
and natural genetic variation to basically do its own experiments which it
has been doing for hundreds and thousands of years
in the human population and for hundreds of thousands of years
across the history leading to the human population.
You basically take this natural genetic variation
that we all carry within us. Every one of us carries
six million perturbations. I've done six million experiments on you,
six million experiments on me, six million experiments on every one
of seven billion people on the planet. What's the six million correspond to?
Six million unique genetic variants that are segregating in the human
population. Every one of us carries millions of
polymorphic sites, poly, many morph forms. Polymorphic means many forms
variants. That basically means that every one of us has
single nucleotide alterations that we have inherited from mom and from dad
that basically can be thought of as tiny little perturbations.
Most of them don't do anything but some of them
lead to all of the phenotypic differences that we see between us.
The reason why two twins are identical is because these variants
completely determine the way that I'm going to look at exactly 93 years of age.
How happy are you with this kind of data set? Is it large enough
of the human population of Earth? Is that too big, too small?
Yeah, so is it large enough is a power analysis question?
In every one of our grants, we do a power analysis based on what is the effect
size that I would like to detect and what is the natural variation
in the two forms. Every time you do a perturbation, you're asking I'm changing
form A into form B. Form A has some natural
phenotypic variation around it and form B has some natural phenotypic variation
around it. If those variances are large and the
differences between the mean of A and the mean of B are small,
then you have very little power. The further the means go apart,
that's the effect size, the more power you have,
and the smaller the standard deviation, the more power you have.
So basically when you're asking is that sufficiently large?
Certainly not for everything but we already have enough power
for many of the stronger effects in the more tight distributions.
So that's a hopeful message that there exists
parts of the genome that have a strong effect that has a small
variance? That's exactly right. Unfortunately,
those perturbations are the basis of disease in many cases.
So it's not a hopeful message, sometimes it's a terrible message.
It's basically well some people are sick but if we can figure out
what are these contributors to sickness, we can then help make them better and
help many other people better who don't carry that exact mutation
but who carry mutations on the same pathways
and that's what we like to call the allelic series
of a gene. You basically have many perturbations
of the same gene in different people each with a different
frequency in the human population and each with a different effect
on the individual that carries them. So you said in the past
there would be these small experiments on perturbations and animal models.
What does this puzzle solving process look like today?
So we basically have you know something like seven billion people in the
planet and every one of them carries something like six million
mutations. You basically have an enormous
matrix of genotype by phenotype by systematically measuring
the phenotype of these individuals and the traditional way of measuring this
phenotype has been to look at one trait at a time.
You would gather families and you would sort of paint
the pedigrees of a strong effect what we like to call
Mendelian mutation. So a mutation that gets transmitted
in a dominant or a recessive but strong effect form
where basically one locus plays a very big role
in that disease and you could then look at carriers versus non carriers
in one family, carries versus non carries in another family
and do that for hundreds sometimes thousands of families
and then trace these inheritance patterns and then figure out what is the gene
that plays that role. Is this the matrix that you're showing
in talks or lectures? So that matrix is the input
to the stuff that I show in talks. So basically that matrix has traditionally
been strong effect genes. What the matrix looks like now
is instead of pedigrees instead of families you basically have
thousands and sometimes hundreds of thousands of unrelated individuals
each with all of their genetic variants and each with their phenotype
for example height or lipids or you know whether they're
sick or not for a particular trait. That has been the modern view
instead of going to families going to unrelated individuals
with one phenotype at a time and what we're doing now
as we're maturing in all of these sciences
is that we're doing this in the context of large medical systems
or enormous cohorts that are very well phenotyped across
hundreds of phenotypes sometimes with their complete electronic health record.
So you can now start relating not just one gene segregating one family
not just thousands of variants segregating with one phenotype
but now you can do millions of variants versus hundreds of phenotypes
and as a computer scientist I mean deconvolving that matrix partitioning it
into the layers of biology that are associated with every one of these
elements is a dream come true it's it's like the world's greatest puzzle
and you can now solve that puzzle by throwing in
more and more knowledge about the function of different genomic regions
and how these functions are changed across tissues
and in the context of disease and that's what my group and many other groups
are doing we're trying to systematically relate this genetic variation
with molecular variation at the expression level of the genes
at the epigenomic level of the gene regulatory circuitry
and at the cellular level of what are the functions that are happening in those
cells at the single cell level using single cell
profiling and then relate all that vast amount of knowledge
computationally with the thousands of traits
that each of these of thousands of variants are perturbing.
I mean this is something we talked about I think last time so there's these
effects at different levels that happen you said at a single cell level
you're trying to see things that happen due to certain perturbations
and then so it's not just like a puzzle of
perturbation and disease it's perturbation then
effect at the cellular level then at an organ level
that by like how do you disassemble this into like what your group is working on
you're basically taking a bunch of the hard problems in the space
how do you break apart a difficult disease
and break it apart into problems that you into puzzles that you can now start
solving. So there's a struggle here computer
scientists love hard puzzles and they're like oh I want to
you know build a method that just deconvolves the whole thing computationally
and you know that's very tempting and it's very appealing
but biologists just like to decouple that complexity experimentally
to just like peel off layers of complexity experimentally
and that's what many of these modern tools that you know my group and others
have both developed and used the fact that we can now
figure out tricks for peeling off these layers of complexity
by testing one cell type at a time or by testing one cell at a time
and you could basically say what is the effect of this genetic variant associated
with Alzheimer's on human brain. Human brain
sounds like oh it's an organ of course just go one organ at a time
but human brain has of course dozens of different brain regions
and within each of these brain regions dozens of different cell types
and every single type of neuron every single type of glial cell
between astrocytes oligodendrocytes microglia
between you know all of the mural cells and the vascular cells and the immune
cells that are coinhabiting the the brain between the
different types of excitatory and inhibitory neurons
that are sort of interacting with each other between different layers
of neurons in the cortical layers every single one of these
has a different type of function to play in cognition
in interaction with the environment in maintenance
of the brain in energetic needs in feeding the brain with blood with oxygen
in clearing out the debris that are resulting from the super high energy
production of cognition in humans so all of these things are basically
potentially deconvolvable computationally but experimentally
you can just do single cell profiling of dozens of regions of the brain across
hundreds of individuals across millions of cells
and then now you have pieces of the puzzle
that you can then put back together to understand
that complexity i mean first of all i mean the human brain the cells in the
human brain are the most okay maybe i'm romanticizing it but cognition
seems to be very complicated so separating into
the function breaking Alzheimer's down to the cellular
level seems very challenging is that basically you're trying to find
a way that some perturbation in genome results in
some obvious major dysfunction in the cell you're trying to find something
like that exactly so so what does human
genetics do human genetics basically looks at the whole path
from genetic variation all the way to disease
so human genetics has basically taken thousands of
Alzheimer's cases and thousands of controls
matched for age for sex for you know environmental
backgrounds and so on so forth and then looked at that map
where you're asking what are the individual genetic perturbations
and how are they related to all the way to Alzheimer's disease
and that has actually been quite successful so we now have
you know more than 27 different loci these are genomic regions
that are associated with Alzheimer's at this end to end level but the moment
you sort of break up that very long path into smaller levels
you can basically say from genetics what are the
epigenomic alterations at the level of gene regulatory elements
where that genetic variant perturbs the control region nearby
that effect is much larger you mean much larger in terms of his
down the line impact or it's much larger in terms of the
measurable effect this a versus b variants is actually so much
cleanly defined when you go to the shorter branches
because for one genetic variant to affect Alzheimer's
that's a very long path that basically means that in the context of millions of
these six million variants that every one of us carries
that one single nucleotide has a detectable effect
all the way to the end I mean it's just mind boggling that that's even
possible but indeed yeah but indeed there are such
effects so the hope is or the most scientifically
speaking the the most effective place where to detect
the alteration that results in disease is earlier on in the pipeline
as early as possible it's it's it's a trade off
if you go very early on in the pipeline now each of these
epigenomic alterations for example this enhancer control region
is active maybe 50 less which is a dramatic effect
now you can ask well how much just changing one regulatory region in the
genome in one cell type change disease well that path is now
long so if you instead look at expression
the path between genetic variation and the expression of one gene goes through
many enhancer regions and therefore it's a subtler effect at the gene
level but then now you're closer because
one gene is acting on you know in the context of only 20 000 other genes
as opposed to one enhancer acting in the context of two million other enhancers
so you basically now have genetic epigenomic the circuitry
transcriptomic the gene expression level and then cellular where you can
basically say I can measure various properties of those cells
what is the calcium influx rate when I have these genetic variation
what is the synaptic density what is the electric
impulse conductivity and so on so forth so you can measure
things along this path to disease and you can also measure
endophenotypes you can basically measure you know
your brain activity you can do imaging in the brain
you can basically measure I don't know the heart rate the pulse the lipids
the amount of blood secreted and so on so forth and then through all of that
you can basically get at the path to causality the path to disease
and is there something beyond cellular so you mentioned lifestyle
interventions or changes as a way to uh or like be able to prescribe changes in
lifestyle like what about organs what about like
the function of the body as a whole yeah absolutely so basically
when you go to your doctor they always measure you know your pulse they always
measure your height those measure your weight
your you know your bmi so basically these are just very basic variables
but with digital devices nowadays you can start measuring hundreds of variables
for every individual you can basically also phenotype
cognitively through tests uh Alzheimer's patients
there are cognitive tests that you can measure that you that you typically do
for cognitive decline these mini mental you know observations that that you have
specific questions too you can think of sort of enlarging the
set of cognitive tests so in the mouse for example you do experiments for how
do they get out of mazes how do they find food whether they recall a fear
whether they shake in a new environment and so on so forth in the human you can
have much much richer phenotypes where you can basically say
not just imaging at the you know organ level but
and in all kinds of other activities at the organ level but you can also do at
the organism level you can do behavioral tests
and how did they do on empathy how did they do on memory
how did they do on long term memory versus short term memory
and so on so forth i love how you're calling that phenotype
i guess it is it is but like your behavior patterns that might change over
over a period of a life yet your ability to remember
things your ability to be yeah empathetic or emotionally
your intelligence perhaps even yeah but intelligence has hundreds of variables
you can be your math intelligence your literary intelligence your puzzle solving
intelligence your logic it could be like hundreds of things and all that
it's we were able to measure that better and better so all that could be
connected to the entire pipeline so we used to think of each of these as a
single variable like intelligence i mean that's ridiculous
it's basically dozens of different genes that are controlling
every single variable you can basically think of
you know imagine us in a video game where every one of us has
measures of you know strength stamina you know energy left and so on so forth
but you could click on each of those like five bars that are just the main bars
and each of those will just give you then hundreds of bars
yeah and you basically say okay great for my you know machine learning task
i want someone who i'm a human who has
these particular forms of intelligence i require now these
you know 20 different things and then you can combine those things
and then relate them to of course performance in particular task
but you can also relate them to genetic variation
that might be affecting different parts of the brain
for example your frontal cortex versus your temporal cortex versus your visual
cortex and so on so forth so genetic variation that affects
expression of genes in different parts of your brain
can basically affect your you know music ability your auditory ability your
smell your you know just dozens of different
phenotypes can be broken down into you know hundreds of cognitive variables
and then relate each of those to thousands of genes that are associated
with them so somebody who loves RPGs role playing
games there's uh there's too few variables that
we can control so i'm excited if we're in fact living in a simulation
this is a video game i'm excited by the quality of the video game
the the the game designer did a hell of a
good job so we're impressed so i don't know at the sunset last
night was a little unrealistic yeah yeah the graphics
exactly come on in video to zoom back out we've been talking about the
genetic origins of diseases but i think it's fascinating to
talk about what are the most important diseases to understand
and especially as it connects to the things that you're working on
so it's very difficult to think about important diseases to understand there's
many metrics of importance one is lifestyle impact
i mean if you look at covid the impact on lifestyle has been enormous
so understanding covid is important because it has impacted
the well being in terms of ability to have a job
ability to have an apartment ability to go to work ability to have a mental
circle of support and uh all of that for you know millions of
americans like huge huge impact so that's one aspect of
importance so basically mental disorders alzheimer's has a huge
importance in the well being of americans
whether or not it die it kills someone for many many years it has a huge impact
so the first measure of importance is just well being
like impact on the quality of life impact on the quality of life absolutely
the second metric which is much easier to quantify is deaths
what is the number one killer the number one killer
is actually heart disease it is actually killing 650 thousand americans per
year number two is cancer with 600
thousand americans number three far far down the
list is accidents every single accident combined so
basically you you know you read the news accidents like you know there was a
huge car crash all over the news but the number of deaths
number three by far 167 thousand lower respiratory disease so that's asthma
not being able to breathe and so on so forth 160 000
alzheimer's number four number five with 120 000
and then stroke brain aneurysms and so on so forth that's 147 000
diabetes and metabolic disorders etc that's 85 000
the flu is 60 000 suicide 50 000 and then overdose etc
you know goes further down the list so of course covid has creeped up to be the
number three killer this year with you know
more than 100 000 americans and counting um and you know but but if you think
about sort of what do we use what are the most important diseases you have to
understand both the quality of life and the just sheer number of
deaths and just numbers of years lost if you wish and and uh each of these
diseases you can think of as uh and also including terrorist
attacks and school shootings for example
things which lead to fatalities you can look at
as problems that could be solved and some problems are harder to solve than
others i mean that's part of the equation so maybe if you
look at these diseases if you look at heart disease or cancer
or alzheimer's or just uh like schizophrenia and
obesity debut like not necessarily things that kill you but
affect the quality of life which problems are solvable
which aren't which are harder to solve which aren't
i love your question because you put it in the context of a global
um effort rather than just a local effort so basically
if you look at the global aspect exercise and nutrition are two
interventions that we can as a society make a much better job at
so if you think about sort of the availability of cheap food
it's extremely high in calories it's extremely detrimental for you like a
lot of processed food etc so if we change that equation
and as a society we made availability of healthy food
much much easier and charged a burger at mcdonald's the price that it costs
on the health system then people would actually start buying more
healthy uh foods so basically that's sort of a
societal intervention if you wish in the same way
increasing empathy increasing education increasing the social
framework and support would basically lead to fewer suicides
it would lead to fewer murders it would lead to fewer
you know deaths overall um so you know that's something that we as a society
can do you can you can also think about external factors versus
internal factors so the external factors are basically communicable
diseases like covid like the flu etc and the internal
factors are basically things like you know cancer and Alzheimer's where
basically your your genetics will eventually you know drive you there
um and then of course with all of these
factors every single disease has both a genetic component
and environmental component so heart disease you know huge genetic
contributor contribution alzheimer's it's like you know
60 plus genetic so i think it's like 79 percent
heritability so that basically means that genetics alone
explains 79 percent of alzheimer's incidents and yes there's a 21
percent environmental component where you could basically
enrich your cognitive environment enrich your social interactions
read more books learn a foreign language go running
you know sort of have a more fulfilling life all of that will actually decrease
alzheimer's but there's a limit to how much that that can
impact because of the huge genetic footprint so this is fascinating so
each one of these problems have a genetic component
and an environment component and so like when there's a genetic component
what can we do about some of these diseases what what have you worked on
what can you say that's uh in terms of problems that are solvable here
or understandable so my group works on the genetic component
but i would argue that understanding the genetic component
can have a huge impact even on the environmental component
why is that because genetics gives us access to mechanism
and if we can alter the mechanism if we can impact the mechanism
we can perhaps counteract some of the environmental components all
interesting so understanding the biological mechanisms leading to
disease is extremely important in being able to
intervene but when you can intervene what you know the analogy that i like to
give is for example for obesity you know think
of it as a giant bathtub of fat there's basically fat coming in from your diet
and there's fat coming out from your exercise
okay that's an in out equation and that's the equation that everybody's
focusing on but your metabolism impacts that you know bathtub
basically your metabolism controls the rate at which
you're burning energy it controls the way the rate at which you're storing
energy and it also teaches you about the various
valves that control the input and the output equation
so if we can learn from the genetics the valves
we can then manipulate those valves and even if the environment is feeding you
a lot of fat and getting a little that out
you can just poke another hole at the bathtub and just get a lot of the fat
out yeah that's fascinating yeah so that we're not just
passive observers of our genetics the more we understand the more we can come
up with actual treatments and i think that's an important
aspect to realize when people are thinking about
strong effect versus weak effect variants so some variants have strong
effects we talked about these Mendelian disorders where a single
gene has a sufficiently large effect pen and trans expressivity and so on so
forth that basically you can trace it in families with
cases and not cases cases not cases and so forth
but even the you know but so these are the genes that everybody says oh
that's the genes we should go after because that's a strong effect gene
i like to think about it slightly differently these are the genes
where genetic impacts that have a strong effect
were tolerated because every single time we have a genetic
association with disease it depends on two things
number one the obvious one whether the gene has an impact on the disease
number two the more subtle one is whether there is
genetic variation standing and circulating and
segregating in the human population that impacts that gene
some genes are so darn important that if you mess with them
even a tiny little amount that person is dead
so those genes don't have variation you're not going to find a genetic
association if you don't have variation that doesn't mean that the gene has no
role it simply that the gene it simply means
that the gene tolerates no mutations so that's actually a strong signal when
there's no variation that's so fast exactly
genes that have very little variation are hugely important you can actually
rank the importance of genes based on how little variation they have
and those genes that have very little variation but no association
with disease that's a very good metric to say oh that's probably a developmental
gene because we're not good at measuring those phenotypes
so it's genes that you can tell evolution has excluded
mutations from but yet we can't see them associated with anything that we can
measure nowadays it's probably early embryonic lethal
what are all the words you just said early embryonic what lethal
meaning meaning that if you don't have that okay there's a bunch of stuff that
is required for a stable functional organism
across the board exactly our entire for for entire species I guess if you look
at sperm it expresses thousands of proteins
does sperm actually need thousands of proteins no
but it's probably just testing them so my speculation
is that misfolding of these proteins is an early
test for failure so that out of the you know millions of sperm
that are possible you select the subset that are just not grossly misfolding
thousands of proteins so it's kind of an insert
that this is folded correctly correct yeah this just
because if this little thing about the folding of a protein isn't correct
that probably means somewhere down the line there's a bigger issue
that's exactly right so fail fast so basically if you look at the mammalian
investment in a newborn that investment is
enormous in terms of resources so mammals have basically evolved
mechanisms for fail fast we're basically in those
early months of development I mean it's it's horrendous of course at the
personal level when you lose a you know your future child
but in some ways there's so little hope for that child to develop
and sort of make it through the remaining months that sort of fail fast is
probably a good evolutionary principle from an evolutionary
for mammals and of course humans have a lot of medical resources
that you can sort of give those children a chance
and you know we have so much more success instead of giving
folks who have these strong carrier mutations a chance but if they're not
even making it through the first three months we're not going to see them
so that's why when we when we say what are the most important genes to focus on
the ones that have a strong effect mutation or the ones that have a weak
effect mutation well you know the jury might be out
because the ones that have a strong effect mutation
are basically you know not mattering that much
the ones that only have weak effect mutations by understanding
through genetics that they have a weak effect mutation
and understanding that they have a causal role on the disease
we can then say okay great evolution has only tolerated a two percent
change in that gene pharmaceutically I can go in and induce a 70 percent
change in that gene and maybe I will poke another
hole at the bathtub that was not easy to control
in you know many of the other sort of strong effect genetic variants
so okay so there's this beautiful map of across the population of things that
you're saying strong and weak effects so stuff with a lot of mutations and stuff
with little mutations with no mutations any of this
map and it lays out the puzzle yeah so so when I say strong effect I mean at
the level of individual mutations so so basically genes where
so so you have to think of first the effect of the gene on the disease
remember how I was sort of painting that map earlier
from genetics all the way to phenotype that gene
can have a strong effect on the disease but the genetic variant
might have a weak effect on the gene so basically
when you ask what is the effect of that genetic variant
on the disease it could be that that genetic variant impacts the gene by a
lot and then the gene impacts the disease by
a little or it could be that the genetic variants in
impacts the gene by a little and then the gene impacts the disease by a lot
so what we care about is genes that impact the disease a lot
but genetics gives us the full equation and what I would argue
is if we couple the genetics with expression variation
to basically ask what genes change by a lot
and you know which genes correlate with disease by a lot
even if the genetic variants change them by a little
then that those are the best places to intervene
those are the best places where pharmaceutical if I have
even a modest effect I will have a strong effect on the disease
whereas those genetic variants that have a huge effect on the disease
I might not be able to change that gene by this much without affecting all
kinds of other things interesting so yeah okay so that's what
we're looking at then what have we been able to find in terms of
which disease could be helped again and don't get me started
this is we have found so much our understanding of disease
has changed so dramatically with genetics I mean places that we had no
idea would be involved so one of the worst things about
my genome is that I have a genetic predisposition to
age related macular degeneration AMD so it's a form of blindness that causes
you to to lose the central part of your vision
progressively as you grow older my increased risk
is fairly small I have an eight percent chance you only have a six percent
chance you I'm an average yeah by the way when
you say my you mean literally yours you know this about you
I know this about me yeah which is kind of
I mean philosophically speaking is a pretty powerful thing
so to live with I mean maybe that's so we agreed to talk again by the way for
the listeners to where we're going to try to focus on science today and a
little bit of philosophy next time but it's interesting
to think about the more you're able to know about yourself from the genetic
information in terms of the diseases how that changes
your own view of life yeah so there's there's a lot of impact there
and there's a something called genetic exceptionalism
which basically thinks of genetics as something very very different
than everything else as a type of determinism and you know let's talk
about that next time so basically a good preview yeah
so let's go back to AMD so basically with AMD
we have no idea what causes an AMD you know
it was it was a mystery until the genetics were worked out
and now the fact that I know that I have a predisposition
allows me to sort of make some life choices number one
but number two the genes that lead to that predisposition
give us insights as to how does it actually work
and that's a place where genetics gave us something totally unexpected
so there's a complement pathway which is an immune function pathway
that was in you know most of the loci associated with AMD
and that basically told us that wow there's an immune basis
to this eye disorder that people had just not expected before
if you look at complement it was recently also
implicated in schizophrenia and there's a type of microglia
that is involved in synaptic pruning so synapses are the connections between
neurons and in this whole use it or lose it view
of mental cognition and other capabilities
you basically have microglia which are immune cells that are sort of
constantly traversing your brain and then pruning neuronal connections
pruning synaptic connections that are not utilized
so in schizophrenia there's thought to be a change in the pruning
that basically if you don't prune your synapses the right way
you will actually have an increased role of schizophrenia this is something that
was completely unexpected for schizophrenia of course we knew it
has to do with neurons but the role of the complement complex
which is also implicated in AMD which is now also implicated in schizophrenia
was a huge surprise what's the complement complex
so it's basically a set of genes the complement genes
that are basically having various immune roles
and as I was saying earlier our immune system has been coopted
for many different roles across the body so they actually play many diverse
roles somehow the immune system is connected to the
synaptic pruning process exactly so immune cells were coopted
to prune synapse how did you figure this out
how does one go off figuring this intricate connection
like pipeline of connections out yeah let me give you another example
so so Alzheimer's disease the first place that you would expect it to act is
obviously the brain so we had basically this
roadmap epigenomics consortium view of the human epigenome the largest map of
the human epigenome that has ever been built
across 127 different tissues and samples
with dozens of epigenomic marks measured in you know
hundreds of donors so what we've basically learned through that
is that you you basically can map what are the active
gene regulatory elements for every one of the tissues in the body
and then we connected these gene regulatory
active maps of basically what regions of the human genome
are turning on in every one of different tissues
we then can go back and say where are all of the genetic loci that are
associated with disease this is something that my group
I think was the first to do back in 2010
in this Ernst Nature biotech paper but basically
we were for the first time able to show that specific chromatin states specific
epigenomic states in that case enhancers were in fact
enriched enriched in disease associated variants
we pushed that further in the Ernst Nature paper a year later
and then in this roadmap epigenomics paper
you know a few years after that but basically that matrix
that you mentioned earlier was in fact the first time that we could see
what genetic traits have genetic variants that are enriched
in what tissues in the body and a lot of that map made complete
sense if you looked at a diversity of immune
traits like allergies and type 1 diabetes and so on so forth
you basically could see that they were enriching
that the genetic variants associated with those traits were enriched
in enhancers in these gene regulatory elements
active in T cells and B cells and hematopoietic stem cells and so on so forth
so that basically gave us uh confirmation in many ways that those
immune traits were indeed enriching immune cells
if you look if you if you looked at type 2 diabetes
you basically saw an enrichment in only one type of sample
and it was pancreatic islets and we know that type 2 diabetes
you know sort of stems from the dysregulation of insulin
in the beta cells of pancreatic islets and that sort of was
you know spot on super precise if you looked at blood pressure
where would you expect blood pressure to occur
you know I don't know maybe in your metabolism in ways that you process
coffee or something like that maybe in your brain the way that you stress out
and increases your blood pressure etc what we found is that blood pressure
localized specifically in the left ventricle
of the heart so the enhancers of the left rectum in the heart
contained a lot of genetic variants associated with blood pressure
if you look at height we found an enrichment specifically
in embryonic stem cell enhancers so the genetic variants predisposing you to
be taller or shorter are in fact acting in developmental stem cells
makes complete sense if you looked at inflammatory bowel disease
you basically found inflammatory which is immune
and also bowel disease which is digestive and indeed we show a double
enrichment both in the immune cells and in the digestive
cells so that basically told us that I have this is acting in both components
there's an immune component in commentary bowel disease and there's a
digestive component and the big surprise was for Alzheimer's
we had seven different brain samples we found
zero enrichment in the brain samples for genetic variants associated with
Alzheimer's and this is mind boggling
our brains were literally hurting what is going on
and what is going on is that the brain samples
are primarily neurons oligodendrocytes
and astrocytes in terms of the cell types that make them up
so that basically indicated that genetic variants associated with
Alzheimer's were probably not acting in
oligodendrocytes astrocytes or neurons so what could they be acting in
well the fourth major cell type is actually microglia
microglia are resident immune cells in your brain
oh nice the immune oh wow and they are cd14 plus which is this
sort of cell surface markers of those cells so they're cd14 plus cells just
like microphages that are circulating in your blood
the microglia are resident monocytes
that are basically sitting in your brain they're tissue specific
monocytes and every one of your tissues like your your your fat for example
has a lot of macrophages that are resin and the m1 versus m2 macrophage ratio
has a huge role to play in obesity and you know so basically again these
immune cells are everywhere but basically what we found
through this completely unbiased view of what are the tissues that likely
underlie different disorders we found that Alzheimer's
was humongously enriched in microglia but not at all in the other cell types
so what what are we supposed to make that if you look at the
tissues involved is that simply useful for indication
of propensity for disease or does it give us somehow a pathway of treatment
it's very much the second if you look at the
um the the way to therapeutics you have to start somewhere
what are you going to do you're going to basically make assays
that manipulate those genes and those pathways in those cell types so
before we know the tissue of action we don't even know where to start
we basically are at a loss but if you know the tissue of action
and even better if you know the pathway of action
then you can basically screen your small molecules
not for the gene you can screen them directly for the pathway
in that cell type so you can basically develop a high throughput multiplexed
you know robotic system for testing the impact of your favorite molecules
that you know are safe efficacious and you know sort of hit that particular
gene and so and so forth you can basically screen those molecules
against either a set of genes that act in that pathway
or on the pathway directly by having a cellular assay
and then you can basically go into mice and do experiments and basically sort
of figure out ways to manipulate these processes
that allow you to then to go back to humans and do a clinical trial that
basically says okay i was able indeed to reverse these processes in mice
can i do the same thing in humans so that the the knowledge of the tissues
gives you the pathway to treatment but that's not the only part
there are many additional steps to figuring out the mechanism of disease
i mean so that's really promising maybe uh to take a small step back you've
mentioned all these puzzles that were figured out with the nature paper
for me you've mentioned a ton of diseases
from obesity to Alzheimer's even schizophrenia i think you mentioned
is just uh what is the actual methodology of figuring this out
so indeed i mentioned a lot of diseases and and my lab works on a lot of
different disorders and the reason for that
is that if you look at the
if you look at biology it used to be you know zoology departments and
botanology departments and you know virology departments and so on and so
forth and MIT was one of the first schools to basically create a biology
department like oh we're gonna study all of life suddenly
why was that even a case because the advent of DNA
and the genome and the central dogma of DNA makes RNA makes protein
in many ways unified biology you could suddenly
study the process of transcription in viruses or in bacteria
and have a huge impact on yeast and fly and maybe even mammals
because of this realization of these common underlying processes
and in the same way that DNA unified biology
genetics is unifying disease studies so you used to have
um you used to have uh you know i don't know um
cardiovascular disease department and uh you know neurological disease
department and you know the generation department and
you know um basically immune and cancer and so on so forth
and all of these were studied in different labs
you know because it made sense because we basically the first step was
understanding how the tissue functions and we kind of knew the tissues
involved in cardiovascular disease and so on so forth
but what's happening with human genetics is that all of that all of these
walls and edifices that we had built are crumbling
and the reason for that is that genetics
is in many ways revealing unexpected connections
so suddenly we now have to bring the immunologists
to work on Alzheimer's they were never in their room
they were in another building altogether the same way for schizophrenia
we now have to sort of worry about all these interconnected
aspects for metabolic disorders we're finding contributions from brain
so suddenly we have to call the neurologists from the other building
and so on so forth so in my view it makes no sense anymore
to basically say oh i'm a geneticist studying immune disorders
i mean that's that's ridiculous because i mean yeah of course in many ways
you still need to sort of focus but what what what we're doing is that we're
basically saying we'll go wherever the genetics takes us
and by building these massive resources by working on
our latest map is now 833 tissues sort of the the next generation of
the epitomics roadmap which we're now called epimap
is 833 different tissues and using those we've basically found
enrichments in 540 different disorders those enrichments are not like oh
great you guys work on that and we'll work on this
they're intertwined amazingly so of course there's a lot of modularity
but there's these enhancers that are sort of broadly active and these disorders
that are broadly active so basically some enhancers are active in old tissues
and some disorders are enriching in old tissues so basically there's these
multifactorial and this other class which i like to call
polyfactorial diseases which are basically lighting up everywhere
and in many ways it's you know sort of cutting across these walls that were
previously built across these departments and the polyfactorial ones were
probably the previous structure departments wasn't
equipped to deal with those i mean again maybe it's a romanticized
question but you know there's in physics there's a theory of everything
do you think it's possible to move towards an almost
theory of everything of disease from a genetic perspective
so if this unification continues is it possible that
like do you think in those terms like trying to arrive
at a fundamental understanding of how disease emerges period
that unification is not just foreseeable
it's inevitable i see it as inevitable
we have to go there you cannot be a specialist
anymore if you're a genomicist you have to be a specialist
in every single disorder and the reason for that is that
the fundamental understanding of the circuitry of the human genome
that you need to solve schizophrenia that fundamental circuitry is hugely
important to solve Alzheimer's and that same circuitry is hugely
important to solve metabolic disorders and that same exact circuitry
is hugely important for solving immune disorders and cancer
and you know every single disease so all of them
have the same sub task and i teach dynamic programming in my class
dynamic program is all about sort of not redoing the work
it's reusing the work that you do once so basically for us to say oh great
you know you guys in the immune building go solve the fundamental circuitry of
everything and then you guys in the schizophrenia building go
solve the fundamental circuitry of everything separately
is crazy so what we need to do is come together
and sort of have a circuitry group the circuitry building that sort of tries
to solve the circuitry of everything and then the immune folks
who will apply this knowledge to all of the disorders that are
associated with immune dysfunction and the schizophrenia folks
will basically interacting with both the immune folks and with the neuronal
folks and all of them will be interacting with the
circuitry folks and so on so forth so that's sort of the current
structure of my group if you wish so basically what we're doing is
focusing on the fundamental circuitry but at the same time we're the users
of our own tools by collaborating with
many other labs in every one of these disorders that we mentioned
we basically have a heart focus on cardiovascular disease coronary artery
disease heart failure and so forth we have an immune focus on
several immune disorders we have a cancer focus
on uh metastatic melanoma and immunotherapy response
we have a psychiatric disease focus on schizophrenia autism ptsd
and other psychiatric disorders we have an Alzheimer's and neurodegeneration
focus on hunting to disease ALS and you know
AD related disorders like frontal temporal dementia and louis body
dementia and of course a huge focus on Alzheimer's
we have a metabolic focus on the role of exercise
and diets and sort of how they're impacting metabolic
you know organs across the body and across many different tissues
and all of them are interfacing with the circuitry
and the reason for that is another computer science principle
of eat your own dog food if everybody ate their own dog food
dog food would taste a lot better the reason why
microsoft excel and word and powerpoint was so important
and so successful is because the employees
that were working on them were using them for their day to day tasks
you can't just simply build a circuitry and say
here it is guys take the circuitry we're done without being the
users of that circuitry because you then go back
and because we span the whole spectrum from profiling the epigenome
using comparative genomics finding the important nucleotide in the genome
building the basic functional map of what are the genes in the human genome
what are the gene regulatory elements of the human genome
i mean over the years we've written a series of papers on how do you find human
genes in the first place using comparative genomics
how do you find the motifs that are the building blocks of gene regulation
using comparative genomics how do you then find how these motifs come together
and act in specific tissues using epigenomics how do you link regulators
to enhancers and enhancers to their target genes
using epigenomics and regulatory genomics so
through the years we've basically built all this infrastructure
for understanding what i like to say every single nucleotide of the human genome
and how it acts in every one of the major cell types and tissues of the human body
i mean this is no small task this is an enormous task that takes the entire
field and that's something that my group has taken on
along with many other groups and we have also
and that sort of a thing sets my group perhaps apart we have also worked
with specialists in every one of these disorders
to basically further our understanding all the way down to disease
and in some cases collaborating with pharma to go all the way down to
therapeutics because of our deep deep understanding
of that basic circuitry and how it allows us to now improve the
circuitry not just treat it as a black box but
basically go and say okay we need a better cell type specific wiring
that we now have at the tissue specific level so we're focusing on that
because we're understanding you know the needs from the disease front
so you have a sense of the entire pipeline i mean one
maybe you can indulge me one nice question to ask would be
how do you from the scientific perspective go from knowing nothing
about the disease to going you said to go into the
entire pipeline and actually have a drug or or a treatment that cures that
disease so that's an enormously long path
and an enormously great challenge and what i'm trying to argue is that
it progresses in stages of understanding
rather than one gene at a time the traditional view of biology was
you have one postdoc working on this gene and another postdoc working on that
gene and they'll just figure out everything about
that gene and that's their job what we've realized is how
polygenic the diseases are so we can't have one postdoc per
gene anymore we now have to have these cross cutting
needs and i'm going to describe the path
to circuitry along those needs and every single one of these paths
we are now doing in parallel across thousands of genes
so the first step is you have a genetic association
and we talked a little bit about sort of the Mendelian path
and the polygenic path to that association so the Mendelian path was
looking through families to basically find gene regions
and ultimately genes that are underlying particular disorders
the polygenic path is basically looking at
unrelated individuals in this giant matrix of genotype
by phenotype and then finding hits where a particular variant
impacts disease all the way to the end and then we now have a connection not
between a gene and a disease but between a genetic region and a
disease and that distinction is not understood by most people
so i'm going to explain it a little bit more
why do we not have a connection between a gene
and a disease but we have a connection between a genetic region and a disease
the reason for that is that 93 percent of genetic variants
that are associated with disease don't impact the protein at all
so if you look at the human genome there's 20 000 genes
there's 3.2 billion nucleotides only 1.5 percent of the genome
codes for proteins the other 98.5 percent does not code for proteins
if you now look at where are the disease variants located
93 percent of them fall in that outside the gene's portion
of course genes are enriched but they're only enriched by a factor of three
that means that still 93 percent of genetic variants
fall outside the proteins why is that difficult why is that a problem
the problem is that when a variant falls outside the gene
you don't know what gene is impacted by that variant you can't just say oh
it's near this gene let's just connect that variant to the gene
and the reason for that is that the genome circuitry
is very often long range so you basically have that genetic variant
that could sit in the intron of one gene and an intron is sort of the
the place between the exons that code for proteins so proteins are split up
into exons and introns and every exon codes for a particular subset of
amino acids and together they're spliced together
and then make the final protein so that genetic variant might be sitting in an
intron of a gene it's transcribed with the gene
it's processed and then excised but it might not impact this gene at all
it might actually impact another gene that's a million nucleotides away so
it's just riding along even though it has nothing to do with the
with this nearby neighborhood that's exactly right
let me give you an example the strongest genetic association with obesity
was discovered in this FTO gene fat and obesity associated gene
so this FTO gene was studied ad nauseam people did tons of experiments on it
they figured out that FTO is in fact a RNA methylation
transferase it basically it sort of impacts something that we know
that we call the epitranscriptome just like the genome can be modified
the transcriptome the transcripts of the genes
can be modified and we basically said oh great that means that
that epitranscriptomics is hugely involved in obesity because that
that gene FTO is you know clearly where the genetic locus is at
my group studied FTO in collaboration with you know a wonderful team led by
Melina Klausnitzer and what we found is that this FTO locus
even though it is associated with obesity
does not implicate the FTO gene
the genetic variant sits in the first intran of the FTO gene
but it controls two genes IRX3 and IRX5 that are sitting
1.2 million nucleotides away several genes away
oh boy uh what am i supposed to feel about that because isn't that like super
complicated then uh so so the way that i was introduced at a
conference a few years ago was uh and here's Manolis Kelis who
wrote the most depressing paper of 2015
and the reason for that is that the entire pharmaceutical industry was so
comfortable that there was a single gene in that locus
because in some loci you basically have three dozen genes that are all sitting
in the same region of association and you're like oh gosh which ones of those
is it but even that question of which ones of
those is it is making the assumption that it is
one of those as opposed to some random gene just far far away
which is what our paper showed so basically what our paper showed is that
you can't ignore the circuitry you have to first figure out the circuitry
all of those long range interactions how every genetic variant impacts the
expression of every gene in every tissue imaginable
across hundreds of individuals and then you now have
one of the building blocks not even all of the building blocks for then going
and understanding disease so okay so embrace the the
wholeness of the circuitry correct but what so back to the question of
starting knowing nothing to the disease and and go into the treatment
so what are the next steps so you basically have to first figure out the
tissue and then describe how you figure out the
tissue you figure out the tissue by taking all of these
noncoding variants that are sitting outside proteins
and then figuring out what are the epigenomic enrichments
and the reason for that you know thankfully is that there is convergence
that the same processes are impacted in different ways by different loci
and that's a saving grace for our field the fact that if I look at hundreds of
genetic variants associated with Alzheimer's they localize
in a small number of processes can you clarify why that's hopeful so like they
show up in the same exact way in the in the specific set of
processes yeah so so basically there's a small
number of biological processes that underlie or at least that play them the
biggest role in every disorder so in Alzheimer's
you basically have you know maybe 10 different types of processes
one of them is lipid metabolism one of them is immune cell function
one of them is neuronal energetics so these are just a small number of
processes but you have multiple lesions
multiple genetic perturbations that are associated with those processes
so if you look at schizophrenia it's excitatory neuron function it's
inhibitory neuron function it's synaptic pruning it's calcium
signaling and so on so forth so when you look at disease genetics
you have one hit here and one hit there and one hit there and one hit there
completely different parts of the genome but it turns out all of those he
hits are calcium signaling proteins oh cool you're like
aha that means that calcium signaling is important
so those people who are focusing on one focus at a time cannot possibly
see that picture you have to become a genomicist you have to
look at the omics the om the holistic picture
to understand these enrichments but you you mentioned the convergence thing so
the whatever the thing associated with the disease shows up
so let me explain convergence yeah convergence is such a beautiful concept
so you basically have these four genes
that are converging on calcium signaling
so that basically means that they are acting each in their own way
but together in the same process but now
in every one of these low side you have many
enhancers controlling each of those genes that's another type of convergence
where dysregulation of seven different enhancers might all converge
on dysregulation of that one gene which then converges
on calcium signaling and in each one of those enhancers
you might have multiple genetic variants distributed across
many different people everyone has their own different mutation
but all of these mutations are impacting that enhancer and all of these
enhancers are impacting that gene and all of these genes are impacting this
pathway and all these pathways are acting the same tissue
and all of these tissues are converging together on the same biological process
of schizophrenia and you're saying the saving grace
is that that convergence seems to happen for a lot of these diseases
for all of them basically that for every single disease that we've looked at
we have found an epigenomic enrichment how do you do that
you basically have all of the genetic variants associated with the disorder
and then you're asking for all of the enhancers active in a particular tissue
for 540 disorders we've basically found that
indeed there is an enrichment that basically means that
there is commonality and from the commonality we can just
get insights so to explain in the mathematical terms
we're basically building an empirical prior
we're using a Bayesian approach to basically say great all of these variants
are equally likely in a particular locus to be important
in a genetic so in a genetic locus you basically have
a dozen variants that are co inherited because the way that inheritance works
in the human genome is through all of these recombination events
during meiosis you basically have you know
you inherit maybe three chromosome three for example in your body
he's inherited from four different parts one part comes from your
dad another part comes from your mom another part comes from your dad and
another part comes from your mom so basically the way that it
sorry from your mom's mom so you basically have one copy that
comes from your dad and one copy that comes from your mom but that copy that
you got from your mom is a mixture of her maternal
and her paternal chromosome and the copy that you got from your dad is a
mixture of his maternal and his paternal chromosome. So these breakpoints that happen
when chromosomes are lining up are basically ensuring through these crossover events,
they're ensuring that every child cell during the process of meiosis where you basically have
one spermatozoid that basically couples with one ovule to basically create one egg to basically
create the zygote. You basically have half of your genome that comes from dad and half your
genome that comes from mom, but in order to line them up, you basically have these crossover
events. These crossover events are basically leading to co inheritance of that entire block
coming from your maternal grandmother and that entire block coming from your maternal grandfather.
Over many generations, these crossover events don't happen randomly. There's a protein called
PRDM9 that basically guides the double stranded breaks and then leads to these crossovers
and that protein has a particular preference to only a small number of hotspots of recombination
which then leads to a small number of breaks between these co inheritance patterns. So even
though there are six million variants, there are six million loci, this variation is inherited in
blocks and every one of these blocks has like two dozen genetic variants that are all associated.
So in the case of FTO, it wasn't just one variant, it was 89 common variants that were all
humongously associated with obesity. Which ones of those is the important one? Well, if you look
at only one locus, you have no idea, but if you look at many loci, you basically say, aha,
all of them are enriching in the same epigenomic map. In that particular case, it was mesenchymal
stem cells. So these are the progenitor cells that give rise to your brown fat and your white fat.
Progenitors like the early on developmental stem cells.
So you start from one zygote and that's a tautipotent cell type. It can do anything.
You then, you know, that cell divides, divides, divides, and then every cell division is leading
to specialization where you now have a mesodermal lineage and ectodermal lineage and endodermal
lineage that basically leads to different parts of your body. The ectoderm will basically give
rise to your skin. Ecto means outside, derm is skin. So ectoderm, but it also gives rise to
your neurons and your whole brain. So that's a lot of ectoderm. Mesoderm gives rise to your
internal organs, including the vasculature and, you know, your muscle and stuff like that. So
you basically have this progressive differentiation. And then if you look further, further down that
lineage, you basically have one lineage that will give rise to both your muscle and your bone,
but also your fat. And if you go further down the lineage of your fat, you basically have your
white fat cells. These are the cells that store energy. So when you eat a lot, but you don't
exercise too much, there's an excess set of calories, excess energy. What do you do with those?
You basically create, you spend a lot of that energy to create these high energy molecules,
lipids, which you can then burn when you need them on a rainy day. So that leads to obesity
if you don't exercise and if you overeat, because your body is like, oh, great, I have all these
calories. I'm going to store them. Ooh, more calories. I'm going to store them too. Ooh,
more calories. And the, you know, 42% of European chromosomes have a predisposition to storing fat,
which was selected probably in the, you know, food scarcity periods. Like basically as we were
exiting Africa, you know, before and during the ice ages, you know, there was probably a selection
to those individuals who made it north to basically be able to store energy, you know, a lot more
energy. So you basically now have this lineage that is deciding whether you want to store energy
in your white fat or burn energy in your beige fat. Turns out that your fat is, you know, like
we, we have such a bad view of fat. Fat is your best friend. Fat can both store all these excess
lipids that would be otherwise circulating through your, you know, body and causing damage,
but it can also burn calories directly. If you have too much of energy, you can just choose to
just burn some of that as heat. So basically when you're cold, you're burning energy to basically
warm your body up and you're burning all these lipids and you're burning all these caters.
Burning all these caters. So what we basically found is that across the board, genetic variants
associated with obesity across many of these regions were all enriched repeatedly in mesenchymal,
stem cell enhancers. So that gave us a hint as to which of these genetic variants was likely
driving this whole association. And we ended up with this one genetic variant called RS142,
1085. And that genetic variant out of the 89 was the one that we predicted to be causal for the
disease. So going back to those steps, first step is figure out the relevant tissue based on the
global enrichment. Second step is figure out the causal variant among many variants in this
linkage disequilibrium in this co inherited block between these recombination hotspots,
these boundaries of these inherited blocks. That's the second step. The third step is once you know
that causal variant, try to figure out what is the motif that is disrupted by that causal variant.
Basically, how does it act? Variants don't just disrupt elements, they disrupt the binding of
specific regulators. So basically the third step there was how do you find the motif that is responsible
like the gene regulatory word, the building block of gene regulation that is responsible for that
dysregulatory event. And the fourth step is finding out what regulator normally binds that motif
and is now no longer able to bind. And then once you have the regulator, can you then try to figure
out how to what after developed how to fix it? That's exactly right. You now know how to intervene.
You have basically a regulator, you have a gene that you can then perturb and you say, well,
maybe that regulator has a global role in obesity. I can perturb the regulator.
Just to clarify, when we say perturbed, on the scale of a human life, can a human being be helped?
Of course. Of course. Yeah. I guess understanding is the first step.
No, no, but perturbed basically means you now develop therapeutics, pharmaceutical therapeutics
against that. Or you develop other types of intervention that affect the expression of that
gene. What do pharmaceutical therapeutics look like when your understanding is on a genetic level?
Yeah. Sorry if it's a dumb question. No, no, no. It's a brilliant question,
but I want to save it for a little bit later when we start talking about therapeutics.
Perfect. We've talked about the first four steps. There's two more. So basically the first step is
figure out the zero step. The starting point is the genetics. The first step after that is figure
out the tissue of action. The second step is figuring out the nucleotide that is responsible
or set of nucleotides. The third step is figuring out the motif and the upstream regulator,
number four. Number five and six is what are the targets? So number five is great.
Now I know the regulator, I know the motif, I know the tissue, and I know the variant.
What does it actually do? So you have to now trace it to the biological process
and the genes that mediate that biological process. So knowing all of this can now allow
you to find the target genes. How? By basically doing perturbation experiments or by looking
at the folding of the epigenome or by looking at the genetic impact of that genetic variant
on the expression of genes. And we use all three. So let me go through them. Basically one of them
is physical links. This is the folding of the genome onto itself. How do you even figure out
the folding? It's a little bit of a tangent, but it's a super awesome technology. Think of the
genome as again this massive packaging that we talked about of taking two meters worth of DNA
and putting it in something that's a million times smaller than two meters worth of DNA,
that's a single cell. You basically have this massive packaging and this packaging basically
leads to the chromosome being wrapped around in sort of tight, tight ways. In ways, however,
that are functionally capable of being reopened and reclosed. So I can then go in and figure out
that folding by sort of chopping up the spaghetti soup, putting glue and ligating the segments that
were chopped up but nearby each other, and then sequencing through these ligation events to figure
out that this region of this chromosome, that region of the chromosome were near each other,
that means they were interacting, even though they were far away on the genome itself.
So that chopping up sequencing and regluing is basically giving you folds of the genome that
we call. Sorry, can you backtrack? Of course. How does cutting it help you figure out
which ones were close in the original folding? So you have a bowl of noodles.
Go on. And in that bowl of noodles, some noodles are near each other. Yes.
So throwing a bunch of glue, you basically freeze the noodles in place,
throwing a cutter that chops up the noodles into little pieces.
Now, throwing some ligation enzyme that lets those pieces that were free,
religate near each other. In some cases, they're religate what you had just got,
but that's very rare. Most of the time, they will religate in whatever was proximal. You now have
glued the red noodle that was crossing the blue noodle to each other. You then reverse the glue,
the glue goes away, and you just sequence the heck out of it. Most of the time,
you'll find red segment with, you know, red segment, but you can specifically select for
ligation events that have happened that were not from the same segment by sort of marking
them in a particular way. And then selecting those, and then you sequence and you look for
red with blue matches of sort of things that were glued that were not immediate proximal to
each other. And that reveals the linking of the blue noodle and the red noodle. You're with me
so far? Yeah. Good. So we, you know, we've done these experiments. That's physical. That's physical.
That's step one of the physical. And what the physical revealed is topologically associated
domains, basically big blocks of the genome that are topologically connected together.
That's the physical. The second one is the genetic links. It basically says,
across individuals that have different genetic variants,
how are their genes expressed differently? Remember, before I was saying that the path
between genetics and disease is enormous, but we can break it up to look at the path between
genetics and gene expression. So instead of using Alzheimer's as the phenotype, I can now use
expression of IRX3 as the phenotype, expression of gene A. And I can look at all of the humans
who contain a G at that location and all the humans will contain a T at that location.
And basically say, wow, turns out that the expression of the gene is higher for the T
humans than for the G humans at that location. So that basically gives me a genetic link between
a genetic variant, a locus, a region, and the expression of nearby genes. Good on the genetic
link? I think so. Awesome. So the third link is the activity link. What's an activity link?
It basically says, if I look across 833 different epigenomes, whenever this enhancer is active,
this gene is active. That gives me an activity link between this region of the DNA and that gene.
And then the fourth one is perturbations, where I can go in and blow up that region and see what
are the genes that change in expression. Or I can go in and over activate that region and see what
genes change in expression. So I guess that's similar to activity? Yeah. Yeah. So that's
similar to activity. I agree, but it's causal rather than correlational. Again, I'm a little weird.
No, no, you're 100% on. It's exactly the same as activity perturbation where I go and intervene.
Yes. I basically take a bunch of cells. So you know CRISPR, right? CRISPR is this
genome guidance and cutting mechanism. It's what George George likes to call genome vandalism.
So you basically are able to, you can basically take a guide RNA that you put into the CRISPR
system and the CRISPR system will basically use this guide RNA, scan the genome, find wherever
there's a match and then cut the genome. So, you know, I digress, but it's a bacterial immune
defense system. So basically bacteria are constantly attacked by viruses, but sometimes they win
against the viruses and they chop up these viruses and remember as a trophy inside their genome,
they have this low side, this CRISPR low side that basically stands for clustered repeats,
interspersed, et cetera. So basically it's an interspersed repeats structure where basically
you have a set of repetitive regions and then interspersed where these variable segments
that were basically matching viruses. So when this was first discovered, it was basically
hypothesized that this is probably a bacterial immune system that remembers the trophies of
the viruses that manage the kill. And then the bacteria pass on, you know, they sort of do lateral
transfer of DNA and they pass on these memories so that the next bacterium says, oh, you killed
that guy, when that guy shows up again, I will recognize him. And the CRISPR system was basically
evolved as a bacterial adaptive immune response to sense foreigners that should not belong and to
just go and cut their genome. So it's an RNA guided RNA cutting enzyme or an RNA guided DNA
cutting enzyme. So there's different systems, some of them cut DNA, some of them cut RNA,
but all of them remember this sort of viral attack. So what we have done now as a field is,
you know, through the work of, you know, Jennifer Donner, Emmanuel Carpentier, Fang Zhang and many
others is coopted that system of bacterial immune defense as a way to cut genomes. You basically
have this guiding system that allows you to use an RNA guide to bring enzymes to cut DNA at a
particular locus. That's so fascinating. So this is like already a natural mechanism, a natural tool
for cutting those useful in this particular context. And we're like, well, we can use that
thing to actually, it's a nice tool that's already in the body. Yeah, yeah, it's not in our body,
it's in the bacterial body. It was discovered by the, by the yogurt industry. They were trying to
make better yogurts and they were trying to make their bacteria in their yogurt cultures
more resilient to viruses. And they were studying bacteria and they found that, wow,
this CRISPR system is awesome. It allows you to defend against that. And then it was coopted in
mammalian systems that don't use anything like that as a, as a, as a targeting way to basically
bring these DNA cutting enzymes to any locus in the genome. Why would you want to cut DNA
to do anything? The reason is that our DNA has a DNA repair mechanism where if a region of the
genome gets randomly cut, you will basically scan the genome for anything that matches
and sort of use it by homology. So the reason why we're deployed is because we now have a spare
copy. As soon as my mom's copy is deactivated, I can use my dad's copy. And somewhere else,
if my dad's copy is deactivated, I can use my mom's copy to repair it. So this is called homologous
based repair. So all you have to do is the cutting and you don't have to do the fixing.
That's exactly right. You don't have to do the fixing because it's already built in.
That's exactly right. But the fixing can be coopted by throwing in a bunch of homologous
segments that instead of having your dad's version, have whatever other version you'd like to use.
So the, so you, you then control the fixing by throwing in a bunch of other stuff.
That's exactly right. And that's how you do genome editing. So that's what CRISPR is.
That's what in popular culture, people use the term. I've never, wow, that's brilliant.
So CRISPR is genome vandalism followed by a bunch of band aids that have the sequence that you'd
like. And you can control the, the choices of band aids. Correct. And of course, there's new
generations of CRISPR. There's something that's called prime editing that was sort of very,
very much in the press recently, that basically instead of sort of making a double stranded break,
which again is genome vandalism, you basically make a single stranded break.
You basically just nick one of the two strands, enabling you to sort of peel off without sort
of completely breaking it up and then repair it locally using a guide that is coupled to your
initial RNA that took you to that location. Dumb question, but is CRISPR as awesome and
cool as it sounds? I mean, technically speaking, in terms of like, as a tool for manipulating our
genetics in the positive meaning of the word manipulating, or is there downsides,
drawbacks in this whole context of therapeutics that we're talking about or understanding and
so on. So, when I teach my students about CRISPR, I show them articles with the headline
genome editing tool revolutionizes biology. And then I show them the date of these tools,
of these articles, and they're 2004, like five years before CRISPR was invented.
And the reason is that they're not talking about CRISPR. They're talking about zinc finger enzymes
that are another way to bring these codders to the genome. It's a very difficult way of sort of
designing the right set of zinc finger proteins, the right set of amino acids that will now target
a particular long stretch of DNA. Because, you know, for every location that you want to target,
you need to design a particular regulator, a particular protein that will match that region
well. There's another technology called tailings, which are basically, you know, just a different
way of using proteins to sort of, you know, guide these codders to a particular location of the
genome. These require a massive team of engineers, of biological engineers to basically design a set
of amino acids that will target a particular sequence of your genome. The reason why CRISPR is
amazingly, awesomely revolutionary is because instead of having this team of engineers
design a new set of proteins for every location that you want to target, you just type it in
your computer and you just synthesize an RNA guide. The beauty of CRISPR is not the cutting,
it's not the fixing. All of that was there before. It's the guiding, and the only thing that changes
that it makes the guiding easier by sort of, you know, just typing in the RNA sequence,
which then allows the system to sort of scan the DNA to find that.
So the coding, the engineering of the cutter is easier on the, in terms of, that's kind of similar
to the story of deep learning versus old school machine learning. Some of the challenging parts
are automated. Okay, so, but CRISPR is just one cutting technology. And then there's,
that's part of the challenges and exciting opportunities of the field is to design different
cutting technologies. Yeah. So now, we, you know, this was a big parenthesis on CRISPR.
But now you, you know, when we were talking about perturbations, you basically now have the ability
to not just look at correlation between enhancers and genes, but actually go and either
destroy that enhancer and see if the gene changes in expression, or you can use the CRISPR targeting
system to bring in not vandalism and cutting, but you can couple the CRISPR system with,
and the CRISPR system is called usually CRISPR Cas9, because Cas9 is the protein that will then come
and cut. But there's a version of that protein called dead Cas9, where the cutting part is
deactivated. So you basically use D Cas9, dead Cas9, to bring in an activator or to bring in a
repressor. So you can now ask, is this enhancer changing that gene by taking this modified CRISPR,
which is already modified from the bacteria to be used in humans, that you can now modify the Cas9,
to be dead Cas9, and you can now further modify to bring in a regulator. And you can basically
turn on or turn off that enhancer and then see what is the impact on that gene. So these are the four
ways of linking the locus to the target gene. And that's step number five. Okay, step number five
is find the target gene. And step number six is what the heck does that gene do? You basically now
go and manipulate that gene to basically see what are the processes that change. And you can
basically ask, well, you know, in this particular case, in the FTO locus, we found mesenchymal stem
cells that are the progenitors of white fat and brown fat, or beige fat. We found the RS1421085
nucleotide variant as the causal variant. We found this large enhancer, this master regulator,
I like to call it OB1 for obesity one, like the strongest enhancer associated with and OB1 was
kind of chubby as the actor. I don't know if you remember him. So you basically are using this
Jedi mind trick to basically find out the location of the genome that is responsible, the enhancer
that harbors it, the motif, the upstream regulator, which is arid 5B for AT rich interacting domain
5B, that's a protein that sort of comes and binds normally. That protein is normally a
repressor. It represses this super enhancer, this massive 12,000 nucleotide master regulatory
control region. And it turns off IRX3, which is a gene that's 600,000 nucleotides away,
and IRX5, which is 1.2 million nucleotides away. So those and what's the effect of turning them off?
That's exactly the next question. So step six is what do these genes actually do?
So we then ask, what does RX3 and RX5 do? The first thing we did is look across individuals
for individuals that had higher expression of RX3 or lower expression of RX3. And then
we looked at the expression of all of the other genes in the genome. And we looked for simply
correlation. And we found that IRX3 and RX5 were both correlated positively with lipid metabolism
and negatively with mitochondrial biogenesis. You're like, what the heck does that mean?
It doesn't sound related to obesity. Not at all, superficially. But lipid metabolism should,
because lipids is these high energy molecules that basically store fat. So IRX3 and RX5 are
negatively correlated with lipid metabolism. So that basically means that when they turn on
lipid metabolism, positively, when they turn on, they turn on lipid metabolism. And they're
negatively correlated with mitochondrial biogenesis. What do mitochondria do in this whole
process? Again, small parenthesis. What are mitochondria?
Mitochondria are little organelles. They arose. They only are found in eukaryotes.
U means good. Karyote means nucleus. So truly like a true nucleus. So eukaryotes have a nucleus.
Prokaryotes are before the nucleus. They don't have a nucleus. So eukaryotes have a nucleus.
Compartmentalization. Eukaryotes have also organelles. Some eukaryotes have chloroplasts.
These are the plants. They photosynthesize. Some other eukaryotes, like us, have another
type of organelle called mitochondria. These arose from an ancient species that we engulfed.
This is an endosymbiosis event. Symbiosis, bio means life. Sim means together. So symbiotes
are things that live together. Endosymbiosis, endo means inside. So endosymbiosis means you live
together, holding the other one inside you. So the pre eukaryotes engulfed an organism that
was very good at energy production. And that organism eventually shed most of its genome
to now have only 13 genes in the mitochondrial genome. And those 13 genes are all involved in
energy production, the electron transport chain. So basically, electrons are these massive super
energy rich molecules. We basically have these organelles that produce energy. And when your
muscle exercises, you basically multiply your mitochondria. You basically sort of, you know,
use more and more mitochondria. And that's how you get beefed up. So basically, the muscle sort
of learns how to generate more energy. So basically, every single time your muscles will, you know,
overnight regenerate and sort of become stronger and amplify their mitochondria and so on and so
forth. So what do mitochondria do? The mitochondria use energy to sort of do any kind of task. When
you're thinking, you're using energy. This energy comes from mitochondria. Your neurons have
mitochondria all over the place. Basically, this mitochondria can multiply as organelles
and they can be spread along the body of your muscle. Some of your muscle cells have actually
multiple nuclei, they're polynucleated, but they also have multiple mitochondria to basically
deal with the fact that your muscle is enormous. You can sort of span these super, super long
length. And you need energy throughout the length of your muscle. So that's why you have
mitochondria throughout the length. And you also need transcription through the length. So you
have multiple nuclei as well. So these two processes, lipids, store energy, what do mitochondria do?
So there's a process known as thermogenesis, thermo heat, genesis generation, thermogenesis
generation of heat. Remember that bathtub with the in and out? That's the equation that everybody's
focused on. So how much energy do you consume? How much energy do you burn? But in every thermodynamic
system, there's three parts to the equation. There's energy in, energy out, and energy lost.
Any machine has loss of energy. How do you lose energy? You emanate heat. So heat is energy loss.
Which is where the thermogenesis comes in. Thermogenesis is actually a regulatory process
that modulates the third component of the thermodynamic equation. You can basically
control thermogenesis explicitly. You can turn on and turn off thermogenesis.
And that's when the mitochondria comes into play. Exactly. So IRIX 3 and RX 5 turn out to be the
master regulators of a process of thermogenesis versus lipogenesis generation of fat. So IRIX
3 and RX 5 in most people burn heat, burn calories as heat. So when you eat too much,
just burn it off in your fat cells. So with that bathtub has basically a sort of dissipation
knob that most people are able to turn on. I am unable to turn that on because I am a
homozygous carrier for the mutation that changes a T into a C in the RS 1 4 2 1 0 8 5 allele,
a locus, a SNP. I have the risk allele twice from my mom and from my dad. So I'm unable to
thermogenize. I'm unable to turn on thermogenesis through IRIX 3 and RX 5 because the regulator
that normally binds here, IRIX 5B, can no longer bind because it's an AT rich interacting domain.
And as soon as I change the T into a C, it can no longer bind because it's no longer AT rich.
But doesn't that mean that you're able to use the energy more efficiently?
You're not generating heat or is that... That means I can eat less and get around just fine.
Yes. So that's a feature actually. It's a feature in a food scarce environment.
If we're all starving, I'm doing great. If we all have access to massive amounts of food,
I'm obese basically. That's taken us through the entire process of then
understanding that why mitochondria and then the lipids are both even though distant or somehow
involved. Different sides of the same coin. You basically choose to store energy or you can choose
to burn energy. And that all of that is involved in the puzzle of obesity. And that's what's
fascinating. Here we are in 2007 discovering the strongest genetic association with obesity
and knowing nothing about how it works for almost 10 years. For 10 years, everybody focused on this
FTO gene and they were like, oh, it must have to do something with RNA modification. And it's like,
no, it has nothing to do with the function of FTO. It has everything to do with all of this other
process. And suddenly the moment you solve that puzzle, which is a multi year effort by the way,
a tremendous effort by Melina and many, many others. So this tremendous effort basically
led us to recognize this circuitry. You went from having some 89 common variants associated in
that region of the DNA sitting on top of this gene to knowing the whole circuitry. When you
know the circuitry, you can now go crazy. You can now start intervening at every level. You can
start intervening at the arid 5B level. You can start intervening with CRISPR cast 9 at the single
SNP level. You can start intervening at IRX3 and RX5 directly there. You can start intervening at
the thermogenesis level because you know the pathway. You can start intervening at the
differentiation level where the decision to make either white fat or beige fat, the energy burning
beige fat is made developmentally in the first three days of differentiation of your adipocytes.
So as they're differentiating, you basically can choose to make fat burning machines or fat
storing machines. And sort of that's how you populate your fat. You basically can now go in
pharmaceutical and do all of that. And in our paper, we actually did all of that. We went in and
manipulated every single aspect. At the nucleotide level, we use CRISPR cast 9 genome editing to
basically take primary adipocytes from risk and non risk individuals and show that by editing
that one nucleotide out of 3.2 billion nucleotides in the human genome, you could then flip between
an obese phenotype and a lean phenotype like a switch. You can basically take
micelles that are non thermogenizing and just flip into thermogenizing cells by changing one
nucleotide. It's mind boggling. It's so inspiring that this puzzle could be solved in this way and
it feels within reach to then be able to crack the problem of some of these diseases.
What are the technologies, the tools that came along that made this possible? What are you excited
about maybe if we just look at the buffet of things that you've kind of mentioned? What's
involved? What should we be excited about? What are you excited about? I love that question because
there's so much ahead of us. So basically solving that one locus required massive amounts of knowledge
that we have been building across the years through the epigenome, through the comparative
genomics to find out the causal variant and the controller regulatory motif through the
conserved circuitry. It required knowing these regulatory genomic wiring. It required high C
of the sort of topologically associated domains to basically find this long range interaction.
It required EQTLs of this sort of genetic perturbation of these intermediate gene phenotypes.
It required all of the arsenal of tools that I've been describing was put together for one
locus and this was a massive team effort, huge investment in time, energy, money, effort,
intellectual, you know, everything. You're referring to, I'm sorry, this one paper? Yeah, this one
single paper. This one single locus. I like to say that this is a paper about one nucleotide
in the human genome, about one bit of information, C versus T in the human genome. That's one bit of
information and we have 3.2 billion nucleotides to go through. So how do you do that systematically?
I am so excited about the next phase of research because the technologies that my group and many
other groups have developed allows us to now do this systematically, not just one locus at a time,
but thousands of loci at a time. So let me describe some of these technologies.
The first one is automation and robotics. So basically, you know, we talked about how you
can take all of these molecules and see which of these molecules are targeting each of these
genes and what do they do. So you can basically now screen through millions of molecules,
through thousands and thousands and thousands of plates, each of which has thousands and thousands
and thousands of molecules, every single time testing, you know, all of these genes and asking
which of these molecules perturb these genes. So that's technology number one, automation and
robotics. Technology number two is parallel readouts. So instead of perturbing one locus
and then asking if I use CRISPR Cas9 on this enhancer to basically use D Cas9 to turn on or
turn off the enhancer, or if I use CRISPR Cas9 on the SNP to basically change that one SNP at a time,
then what happened? But we have 120,000 disease associated SNPs that we want to test.
We don't want to spend 120,000 years doing it. So what do we do? We've basically developed this
technology for massively parallel reporter assays, MPRA. So in collaboration with Tarzan
Mickelson, Eric Lander, I mean, Jason Durie's group has done a lot of that. So there's a lot of
groups that basically have developed technologies for testing 10,000 genetic variants at a time.
Okay. How do you do that? You know, we talked about microarray technology, the ability to
synthesize these huge microarrays that allow you to do all kinds of things like measure gene
expression by hybridization, by measuring the genotype of a person, by looking at hybridization
with one version with a T versus the other version with a C, and then sort of figuring out that I
am a risk carrier for obesity based on these hybridization, differential hybridization in my
genome that says, oh, you seem to only have this allele, or you seem to have that allele.
Microarrays can also be used to systematically synthesize small fragments of DNA. So you can
basically synthesize these 150 nucleotide long fragments across 450,000 spots at a time.
You can now take the result of that synthesis, which basically works through all of these sort
of layers of adding one nucleotide at a time. You can basically just type it into your computer
and order it. And you can basically order 10,000 or 100,000 of these small DNA segments at a time.
And that's where awesome molecular biology comes in. You can basically take all these segments,
have a common start and end barcode or sort of ligator, like just like pieces of a puzzle.
You can make the same end piece and the same start piece for all of them. And you can now
use plasmids, which are these extra chromosomal small DNA circular segments
that are basically inhabiting all our all our genomes. We basically have, you know,
plasmids floating around. Bacteria use plasmids for transferring DNA. And that's where they
put a lot of antibiotic resistance genes. So they can easily transfer them from one bacterium to the
other. So one bacterium evolves a gene to be resistant to a particular antibiotic. It basically
says to all its friends, Hey, here's that sort of DNA piece, we can now coopt these plasmids
into human cells. We can basically make a human cell culture and add plasmids to that human cell
culture that contain the things that you want to test. You now have this library of 450,000
elements. You can insert them each into the common plasmid and then test them in millions of cells
in parallel. And the common plasmid is all the same before you add it. Exactly. The rest of the
plasmid is the same. So it's called an epizomal reporter assay. Epizome means not inside the
genome, it's sort of outside the chromosomes. So it's an epizomal assay that allows you to have
a variable region where you basically test 10,000 different enhancers. And you have a common region
which basically has the same reporter gene. You now can do some very cool molecular biology.
You can basically take the 450,000 elements that you've generated. And you have a piece of the
puzzle here, piece of the puzzle here, which is identical. So they're compatible with that plasmid.
You can chop them up in the middle to separate a barcode reporter from the enhancer and in the
middle put the same gene again using the same piece of the puzzle. You now can have a barcode
readout of what is the impact of 10,000 different versions of an enhancer on gene expression.
So we're not doing one experiment, we're doing 10,000 experiments. And those 10,000 can be
5,000 of different loci and each of them in two versions, risk or non risk. I can now test 10s
of thousands. These are little hypotheses. Exactly. And then you can do 10,000 and wait.
You can test 10,000 hypotheses at once. How hard is it to generate those 10,000?
Trivial, trivial. But it's biology. No, no, generating the 10,000 is trivial because you
basically add, it's biotechnology. You basically have these arrays that add one nucleotide at a
time at every spot. And yet, so it's printing in it. So you're able to control. Super costly.
10,000 bucks. So this isn't millions? 10,000 bucks for 10,000 experiments. Sounds like the right,
you know. So that's super, that's exciting because you don't have to do one thing at a time.
You can now use that technology, these massively parallel reporter assays to test 10,000 locations
at a time. We've made multiple modifications to that technology. One was sharper MPRA, which stands
for, you know, basically getting a higher resolution view by tiling these elements. So you can see
where along the region of control are they acting. And we made another modification called Hydra
for high, you know, definition regulatory annotation or something like that, which basically
allows you to test 7 million of these at a time by sort of cutting them directly from the DNA.
So instead of synthesizing, which basically has the limit of 450,000 that you can synthesize at a
time, basically said, hey, if we want to test all accessible regions of the genome, let's just do an
experiment that cuts accessible regions. Let's take those accessible regions, put them all with the
same end joints of the puzzles, and then now use those to create a much, much larger array of things
that you can test. And then tiling all of these regions, you can then pinpoint what are the driver
nucleotides, what are the elements, how are they acting across 7 million experiments at a time.
So basically, this is all the same family of technology, where you're basically using these
parallel readouts of the barcodes. And then, you know, to do this, we used a technology called
Starseq for self transcribing reporter assets, a technology developed by Alex Stark, my
former postdoc, who's now a PI over in Vienna. So we basically coupled the Starseq, the self
transcribing reporters, where the enhancer can be part of the gene itself. So instead of having a
separate barcode, that enhancer basically acts to turn on the gene, and he's transcribed as part of
the gene. You don't have to have the two separate parts. Exactly. So you can just read them directly.
So there's a constant improvements in this whole process. By the way, generating all these options
is a basically brute force. How much human intuition is? Oh, gosh, of course, it's human
intuition and human creativity and incorporating all of the input data sets. Because again,
the genome is enormous, 3.2 billion, you don't want to test that. Instead, you basically use all
of these tools that I've talked about already, you generate your top favorite 10,000 hypothesis,
and then you go and test all 10,000. And then from what comes out, you can then go to the next step.
So that's technology number two. So technology number one is robotics, automation, where you
have thousands of wells, and you constantly test them. The second technology is instead
of having wells, you have these massively parallel readouts in sort of these pooled asses.
The third technology is coupling CRISPR perturbations with these single cell RNA readouts.
So let me make another parenthesis here to describe now single cell RNA sequencing.
So what does single cell RNA sequencing mean? So RNA sequencing is what has been traditionally used,
well, traditionally the last 20 years, ever since the advent of next generation sequencing.
So basically before RNA expression profiling was based on this microarrays. The next technology
after that was based on sequencing. So you chop up your RNA and you just sequence small molecules,
just like you would sequence a genome, basically reverse transcribe the small RNAs into DNA,
and you sequence that DNA in order to get the number of sequencing reads corresponding to
the expression level of every gene in the genome. You now have RNA sequencing. How do you go to
single cell RNA sequencing? That technology also went through stages of evolution. The first was
microfluidics. You basically had these, or even chambers, you basically had these ways of isolating
individual cells, putting them into a well for every one of these cells. So you have 384 well
plates, and you now do 384 parallel reactions to measure the expression of 384 cells. That sounds
amazing, and it was amazing. But we want to do a million cells. How do you go from these wells
to a million cells? You can't. So what the next technology was after that is instead of using
a well for every reaction, you now use a lipid droplet for every reaction. So you use micro
droplets as reaction chambers to basically amplify RNA. So here's the idea. You basically have
microfluidics where you basically have every single cell coming down one tube in your microfluidics,
and you have little bubbles getting created in the other way with
specific primers that mark every cell with its own barcode. You basically couple the two,
and you end up with little bubbles that have a cell and tons of markers for that cell.
You now mark up all of the RNA for that one cell with the same exact barcode,
and you then lyse all of the droplets, and you sequence the heck out of that,
and you have for every RNA molecule a unique identifier that tells you what cell was it on.
That is such good engineering, microfluidics, and using some kind of primer to put a label
on the thing. I mean, you're making it sound easy. I assume it's beautiful, but it's gorgeous.
So there's the next generation. So that's the second generation. Next generation is forget
the microfluidics all together. Just use big bottles. How can you possibly do that with big
bottles? So here's the idea. You dissociate all of your cells or all of your nuclei from
complex cells like brain cells that are very long and sticky, so you can't do that. So if you have
blood cells or if you have neuronal nuclei or brain nuclei, you can basically dissociate,
let's say, a million cells. You now want to add a unique barcode in each one of a million cells
using only big bottles. How can you possibly do that? Sounds crazy, but here's the idea.
You use a hundred of these bottles. You randomly shuffle all your million cells,
and you throw them into those hundred bottles randomly, completely random. You add one barcode
out of a hundred to every one of the cells. You then you now take them all out, you shuffle them
again, and you throw them again into the same hundred bottles, but now in a different randomization,
and you add a second barcode. So every cell now has two barcodes. You take them out again,
you shuffle them, and you throw them back in. Another third barcode is adding randomly from
the same hundred barcodes. You've now labeled every cell probabilistically based on the unique
path that it took of which of a hundred bottles did it go for the first time, which of a hundred
bottles the second time, and which of a hundred bottles the third time. A hundred times a hundred
times a hundred is a million unique barcodes in every single one of these cells without ever using
microfluid. It's beautiful, right? From a computer science perspective, it's very clever. So you now
have the single cell sequencing technology. You can use the wells, you can use the bubbles,
or you can use the bottles. The bottles still sound pretty damn good. The bottles are awesome,
and that's basically the main technology that we're using. So the bottles is the main technology.
So there are kids now that companies just sell to basically carry out single cell
RNA sequencing that you can basically, for $2,000, you can basically get 10,000 cells from one sample.
And for every one of those cells, you basically have the transcription of thousands of genes.
And of course, the data for any one cell is noisy, but being computer scientists, we can aggregate
the data from all of the cells together across thousands of individuals together to basically
make very robust inferences. So the third technology is basically single cell RNA sequencing that allows
you to now start asking not just what is the brain expression level difference of that genetic variant,
but what is the expression difference of that one genetic variant across every single subtype
of brain cell? How is the variance changing? You can't just, you know, with a brain sample,
you can just ask about the mean, what is the average expression? If I instead have 3,000 cells
that are neurons, I can ask not just what is the neuronal expression, I can say for
layer five excitatory neurons, of which I have, I don't know, 300 cells, what is the variance
that this genetic variant has? So suddenly, it's amazingly more powerful. I can basically start
asking about this middle layer of gene expression at unprecedented levels. And when you look at the
average, it washes out some potentially important signal that corresponds to ultimately the disease.
Completely. Yeah. So that I can do that at the RNA level, but I can also do that at the DNA level
for the epigenome. So remember how before I was telling you about all these technologies that
we're using to probe the epigenome, one of them is DNA accessibility. So what we're doing in my lab
is that from the same dissociation of say a brain sample, where you now have all these tens of thousands
of cells floating around, you basically take half of them to do RNA profiling. And the other have to
do epigenome profiling, both at the single cell level. So that allows you to now figure out what
are the millions of DNA enhancers that are accessible in every one of tens of thousands of cells.
And computationally, we can now take the RNA and the DNA readouts and group them together
to basically figure out how is every enhancer related to every gene. And remember these sort
of enhancer gene linking that we were doing across 833 samples. 833 is awesome. Don't get me wrong.
But 10 million is way more awesome. So we can now look at correlated activity across 2.3 million
enhancers and 20,000 genes in each of millions of cells to basically start piecing together the
regulatory circuitry of every single type of neuron, every single type of astrocytes, oligodendrocytes,
microglial cell, inside the brains of 1,500 individuals that we've sampled across multiple
different brain regions across both DNA and RNA. So that's the data set that my team generated last
year alone. So in one year, we've basically generated 10 million cells from human brain across
a dozen different disorders across ketophenia, Alzheimer's, frontal temporal dementia,
Lewy body dementia, ALS, you know, Huntington's disease, post traumatic stress disorder, autism,
like, you know, bipolar disorder, healthy aging, etc. So it's possible that even just within that
data set lie a lot of keys to understanding these diseases and then be able to, like, directly leads
to then treatment. Correct. Correct. So basically, we are now motivating. Yeah. So our computational
team is in heaven right now. And we're looking for people. I mean, if you have listeners who are
super smart. So this is a very interesting kind of side question. How much of this is biology?
How much of this is computation? So you had the computational biology group, but how much of
I should, should you be comfortable with biology to be able to solve some of these problems?
If you just find if you put several of the hassle you were on,
fundamentally, are you thinking like a computer scientist here?
You have to. This is the only way. As I said, we are the descendants of the first digital
computer. We're trying to understand the digital computer, understand, we're trying to understand
the circuitry, the logic of this digital, you know, core computer and all of these analog layers
surrounding it. So you, you know, the case that I've been making is that you cannot think one gene
at a time. The traditional biology is dead. There's no way you cannot solve disease with
traditional biology. You need it as a component. Once you figured out RX3 and RX5, you now can
then say, Hey, have you guys worked on those genes with your single gene approach? We'd love to know
everything you know. And if you haven't, we now know how important these genes are. Let's now launch
a single gene program to dissect them and understand them. But you cannot use that as a way to dissect
disease. You have to think genomically. You have to think from the global perspective,
and you have to build these circuits systematically. So we need numbers of computer
scientists who are interested and willing to dive into this data, you know, fully, fully in and sort
of extract meaning. We need computer science people who can understand sort of machine learning and
inference and sort of, you know, decouple these matrices, come up with super smart ways of sort
of dissecting them. But we also need by all computer scientists who understand biology,
who are able to design the next generation of experiments. Because many of these experiments,
no one in the right mind would design them without thinking of the analytical approach
that you would use to deconvolve the data afterwards. Because it's massive amounts of
ridiculously noisy data. And if you don't have the computational pipeline in your head before you
even design the experiment, you would never design the experiment that way. That's brilliant. So you
in designing the experiment, you have to see the entirety of the computational pipeline.
That drives the design. That even drives the necessity for that design. Basically, you know,
if you didn't have a computer scientist way of thinking, you would never design these hugely
combinatorial, massively parallel experiments. So that's why you need interdisciplinary teams.
You need teams. And I want to sort of clarify that what do we mean by computational biology group?
The focus is not on computational, the focus is on biology. So we are a biology group. What type
of biology? Computational biology. That's the type of biology that uses the whole genome. That's the
type of biology that designs experiments, genomic experiments that can only be interpreted in the
context of the whole genome. Right. So it's philosophically looking at biology as a computer.
Correct. Correct. So which is in the context of the history of biology is a big transformation.
Yeah. Yeah. You can think of the name as what do we do? Only computation. That's not true. But
how do we study it? Only computationally, that is true. So all of these single cell sequencing
can now be coupled with the technology that we talked about earlier for perturbation.
So here's a crazy thing. Instead of using these wells and these robotic systems for doing
one drug at a time or for perturbing one gene at a time in thousands of wells, you can now do this
using a pool of cells and single cell RNA sequencing. How? You basically can take these
perturbations using CRISPR and instead of using a single guide RNA, you can use a library of
guide RNAs generated exactly the same way using this array technology. So you synthesize a thousand
different guide RNAs. You now take each of these guide RNAs and you insert them in a pool of cells
where every cell gets one perturbation and you use CRISPR editing or CRISPR,
so with either CRISPR Cas9 to edit the genome with these thousand perturbations or with the
activation or with the repression and you now can have a single cell readout where every single cell
has received one of these modifications and you can now in massively parallel ways couple the
perturbation and the readout in a single experiment. How are you tracking which perturbations
with each cell received? So there's ways of doing that but basically one way is to make
that perturbation an expressible vector so that part of your RNA reading is actually
that perturbation itself. So you can basically put it in an expressible part so you can self
drive it. So the point that I want to get across is that the sky is the limit. You basically have
these tools, these building blocks of molecular biology, you have these massive data sets of
computational biology, you have this huge ability to sort of use machine learning and statistical
methods and you know linear algebra to sort of reduce the dimensionality of all these massive
data sets and then you end up with a series of actionable targets that you can then couple
with pharma and just go after systematically. So the ability to sort of bring genetics to the
epigenomics to the transcriptomics to the cellular readouts using these sort of high
throughput perturbation technologies that I'm talking about and ultimately to the organism
through the electronic health record endofenotypes and ultimately the disease battery of assays
at the cognitive level at the physiological level and you know every other level.
There is no better or more exciting field in my view to be a computer scientist then
or to be a scientist in period. Basically this confluence of technologies of computation,
of data, of insight and of tools for manipulation is unprecedented in human history and I think
this is what's shaping the next century to really be a transformative century for our species
and for our planet. So you think the 21st century will be remembered for the big
leaps in understanding and alleviation of biology? If you look at the path between discovery and
therapeutics it's been on the order of 50 years, it's been shortened to 40, 30, 20 and now it's on
the order of 10 years but the huge number of technologies that are going on right now for
discovery will result undoubtedly in the most dramatic manipulation of human biology that
we've ever seen in the history of humanity in the next few years. Do you think we might be able to
cure some of the diseases we started this conversation with? Absolutely. It's only a matter
of time. Basically the complexity is enormous and I don't want to underestimate the complexity
but the number of insights is unprecedented and the ability to manipulate is unprecedented
and the ability to deliver these small molecules and other non traditional medicine perturbations.
There's a lot of new generation of perturbations that you can use at the DNA level, at the RNA
level, at the microRNA level, at the epigenomic level. There's a battery of new generations of
perturbations. If you couple that with cell type identifiers that can basically sense when you are
in the right cell based on the specific combination and then turn on that intervention for that cell
you can now think of combinatorial interventions where you can basically sort of feed a synthetic
biology construct to someone that will basically do different things in different cells. So
basically for cancer this is one of the therapeutics that our collaborator Ron Weiss is using to
basically start sort of engineering the circuits that will use microRNA sensors of the environment
to sort of know if you're in a tumor cell or if you're in an immune cell or if you're in a
stromal cell and so forth and basically turn on particular interventions there. You can sort of create constructs
that are tuned to only the liver cells or only the heart cells or only the you know brain cells
and then have these new generations of therapeutics coupled with this immense amount of knowledge
on the sort of which targets to choose and what biological processes to measure
and how to intervene. My view is that disease is going to be fundamentally altered and alleviated
as we go forward. Next time we talk we'll talk about the philosophical implications
that and the effect of life but let's stick to biology for just a little longer. We did pretty
good today we're still stuck to the science. What are you excited in terms of the future of this
of this field the technologies in your own group in your mind you're leading the world at MIT in
the science and the engineering of this work so what are you excited about here? I could not be
more excited. We are one of many many teams who are working on this. In my team the most exciting
parts are you know many folds so basically we've now assembled these batteries of technologies
we've assembled these massive data sets and now we're really sort of in the stage of our team's
path of generating disease insights so we are simultaneously working on a paper on schizophrenia
right now that is basically using the single cell profiling technologies using this editing and
manipulation technologies to basically show how the master regulators underlying changes in the
brain that are sort of found in in schizophrenia are in fact affecting excitatory neurons and
inhibitory neurons in pathways that are active both in synaptic pruning but also in early development
we've basically found this set of four regulators that are connecting these two processes that were
previously separate in schizophrenia in sort of having a sort of more unified view across those
two those two sides the second one is in the in the area of metabolism we basically now have a beautiful
collaboration with a Goodyear lab that's basically looking at multi tissue perturbations in six or
seven different tissues across the body in the context of exercise and in the context of nutritional
interventions using both mouse and human where we can basically see what are the cell to cell
communications that are that are changing across them and what we're finding is this immense role
of both immune cells as well as adipocyte stem cells in sort of reshaping that circuitry of all
of these different tissues and that's sort of painting to a new path for therapeutic intervention
there in Alzheimer's it's this huge focus on microglia and now we're discovering different
classes of microglial cells that are basically either synaptic or immune and these are playing
vastly different roles in Alzheimer's versus in schizophrenia and what we're finding is this
immense complexity as you go further and further down of how in fact there's 10 different types
of microglia each with their own sort of expression programs we used to think of them as oh yeah they're
microglia but in fact now we're realizing just even in that sort of least abundant of cell types
there's this incredible diversity there the differences between brain regions is is another
sort of major major insight again you know one would think that oh astrocytes are astrocytes no
matter where they are but no there's incredible region specific differences in the expression
patterns of all of the major brain cell types across different brain regions so basically
there's the neocortical regions that are sort of the recent innovation that makes us so different
from all other species there's the sort of you know reptilian brain sort of regions that are sort of
much more uh you know very extremely distinct there's the cerebellum there's um each of those
basically is associated in a different way with disease and what we're doing now is looking into
pseudo temporal models for how disease progresses across different regions of the brain if you look
at Alzheimer's it basically starts in this small region called the entorhinal cortex and then it
spreads through the brain and you know through the hippocampus and you know the ultimately
affecting the neocortex and with every brain region that it hits it basically has a different
impact on the cognitive and you know memory aspects orientation short term memory long
term memory etc which is you know dramatically affecting the cognitive path that the individuals
go through so what we're doing now is uh creating these computational models for ordering the cells
and the regions and the individuals according to their ability to predict Alzheimer's disease
so we can have a cell level predictor of pathology that allows us to now create a temporal time
course that tells us when every gene turns on along this pathology progression and then trace
that across regions and pathological measures that are region specific but also cognitive
measures and so on and so forth so that allows us to now sort of for the first time look at can we
actually do early intervention for Alzheimer's where we know that the disease starts manifesting
for 10 years before you actually have your first cognitive loss can we start seeing that path to
build new diagnostics new prognostics new biomarkers for this sort of early intervention
in Alzheimer's the other aspect that we're looking at is mosaicism we talked about the
common variants and the rare variants but in addition to those rare variants as your initial cell
that that forms the zygote divides and divides and divides with every cell division there are
additional mutations that are happening so what you end up with is your brain being a mosaic
of multiple different types of genetic underpinnings some cells contain a mutation that other cells
don't have so every human has the common variants that all of us carry to some degree the rare
variants that your immediate tree of the human species carries and then there's the somatic
variants which is the tree that happened after the zygote that sort of forms your own body so
these somatic alterations is something that has been previously inaccessible to study in human
postmortem samples but right now with the advent of single cell RNA sequencing and this particular
case we're using the well based sequencing which is much more expensive but gives you a lot richer
information about each of those transcripts so we're using now that richer information to infer
mutations that have happened in each of the thousands of genes that sort of are active in
these cells and then understand how the genome relates to the function this genotype phenotype
relationship that we usually build in GWAS between in genome wide association studies between genetic
variation and disease we're now building that at the cell level where for every cell we can relate
the unique specific genome of that cell with the expression patterns of that cell and the predicted
function using these predictive models that I mentioned before on dysregulation for cognition
for pathology in Alzheimer's at the cell level and what we're finding is that the genes that are
altered and the genetic regions that are altered in common variants versus rare variants versus
somatic variants are actually very different from each other the somatic variants are pointing to
neuronal energetics and oligodendrocyte functions that are not visible in the genetic
legions that you find for the common variants probably because they have too strong of an effect
that evolution is just not tolerating them on the common side of the allele frequency spectrum
so the somatic one that's the variation that happens after the after you individual I mean
this is a dumb question but there's there's mutation and variation I guess that happens there
and you're saying that they're through this if we focus in on individual cells we're able to detect
the story that's interesting there and that might be a very unique kind of important variability
that arises for you said neuronal or something that was energetics energetics so your your I mean
the metabolism of humans is dramatically altered from that of nearby species you know we talked
about that last time that basically we are able to consume meat that is incredibly energy rich
and that allows us to sort of have functions that are you know meeting this humongous brain
that we have basically on one hand every one of our brain cells is much more energy efficient than
our neighbors than our relatives number two we have way more of these cells and number three we
have you know this new diet that allows us to now feed all these needs that basically creates
a massive amount of damage oxidative damage from this huge super powered factory of ideas and thoughts
that we that we carry in our skull and that factory has energetic needs and there's a lot of sort of
biological processes underlying that that we are finding are altered in the context of Alzheimer's
disease that's fascinating that so you have to consider all of these systems if you want to
if you want to understand even something like diseases that you would maybe traditionally
associate with just the particular cells of the brain yeah the immune system the metabolic system
metabolic system and these are all the things that makes us uniquely human so our immune system
is dramatically different from that of our neighbors our societies are so much more clustered the
history of infection that have played the human population is you know dramatically different
from every other species the you know the way that our society in our population has sort of
exploded has basically put unique pressures on our immune system and our immune system has both
coped with that density and also been shaped by as I mentioned the you know vast amount of death
that has happened in the in the black plague and other sort of selective events in human history
famines ice ages and so forth so that's number one them on the sort of immune side on the metabolic
side you know again we are able to sort of run marathons you know I don't know if you remember
the sort of human versus horse experiment where the horse actually tires out faster than the human
and the human actually wins so on the metabolic side we're dramatically different on the immune
side we're dramatically different on the brain side again you know no need to sort of you know
it's a no brainer of how our brain is like enormously more capable and then in you know
in the side of cancer so basically the cancers that humans are having the exposures the environmental
exposures is again dramatically different and the lifespan the expansion of human lifespan
is unseen in any other species in you know recent evolutionary history and that now leads to a lot
of new disorders that are starting to you know manifest late in life so you know Alzheimer's
is one example where basically you know these vast energetic needs over a lifetime of thinking
can basically lead to all of these debris and eventually saturate the system and lead to you
know Alzheimer's in in the late life but there's you know there's just such a such a dramatic
set of frontiers when it comes to aging research that you know we'll so what I often like to say
is that if you want to re to to engineer a car to go from 70 miles an hour to 120 miles an hour
that's fine you can basically you know fix a few components if you wanted to now go at 400 miles an
hour you have to completely redesign the entire car because the system is just not evolved to go
that far basically our human body has only evolved to live to I don't know 120 maybe we can get to
150 with minor changes but if you know as we start pushing these frontiers for not just living but
well living the f zine that we talked about last time so to to basically push f zine into the 80s
and 90s and 100s and you know much further than that we will face new challenges that have you
know never been faced before in terms of cancer the number of divisions in terms of Alzheimer's
and brain related disorders in terms of metabolic disorders in terms of regeneration
there's just so many different frontiers ahead of us so I am thrilled about where we're heading
so basically I see this confluence in my lab and many other labs of AI of you know sort of you
know the next frontier of AI for drug design so basically these sort of graph neural networks
on specific chemical designs that allow you to create new generations of therapeutics these
molecular biology tricks for intervening at the system at every level these personalized medicine
prediction diagnosis and prognosis using the electronic health records and using these
polygenic race scores weighted by the burden the number of mutations that are accumulating
across common rare and somatic variants the burden converging across all of these different
molecular pathways the delivery of specific drugs and specific interventions into specific
cell types and again you've talked with Bob Langer about this there's you know many giants in that
field and then the last concept is not intervening at the single gene level I want you to sort of
conceptualize the concept of an on target side effect what is an on target side effect an
off target side effect is when you design a molecule to target one gene and instead it targets
another gene and you have side effects because of that and on target side effect is when your
molecule does exactly what you were expecting but that gene is pliotropic plio means many
tropos means ways many ways it acts in many ways it it's a multifunctional gene so you find that
this gene plays a role in this but as we talked about the wiring of genes to phenotypes is extremely
dense and extremely complex so the next stage of intervention will be intervening not at the
gene level but at the network level intervening at the set of pathways and the set of genes with
multi input perturbations to the system multi input modulations pharmaceutical or other
interventional and that basically allow you to now work at the sort of full level of understanding
not just in your brain but across your body not just in one gene but across the set of pathways
and so on so forth for every one of these disorders so I think that we're finally at the level of
systems medicine of basically instead of sort of medicine being at the single gene level
medicine being at the systems level where you can be personalized based on the specific
set of genetic markers and genetic perturbations that you are either born with or that you have
developed during your lifetime your unique set of exposures your unique set of biomarkers
and you know your unique set of you know current set of conditions through your
EHR and other ways and the precision component of intervening extremely precisely
in the specific pathways and in specific combinations of genes that should be modulated
to sort of bring you from the disease state to the physiologically normal state or even
to a physiologically improved state through this combination of intervention so that that's in my
view the field where basically computer science comes together with you know artificial intelligence
statistics all of these other tools molecular biology technologies and biotechnology and
pharmaceutical technologies that are sort of revolution and the way of intervention and
of course this massive amount of molecular biology and data gathering and generation and
perturbation in massively parallel ways so there's no better way there's no better you know time
there's no better place to be sort of you know looking at this whole confluence of of ideas
and I'm just so thrilled to be a small part of this amazing enormous ecosystem.
It's exciting to imagine what the humans of a hundred to twenty years from now what their life
experience is like because these ideas seem to have potential to transform the quality of life
that when they look back at us they probably wonder how we were put up with all the suffering
in the world. Minolas it's a huge honor thank you for spending this early Sunday morning with me
I deeply appreciate it see you next time. Sounds like a plan thank you Lex. Thanks for listening
to this conversation with Minolas Kellis and thank you to our sponsors SEMrush which is
an SEO optimization tool, pessimist archive which is one of my favorite history podcasts,
Aidsleep which is a self cooling mattress with smart sensors and an app and finally BetterHelp
which is an online therapy service. Please check out these sponsors in the description to get a
discount and to support this podcast. If you enjoy this thing subscribe on YouTube review it with
five stars and app a podcast follow on Spotify support on Patreon or connect with me on Twitter
at Lex Friedman and now let me leave you some words from Haruki Barakami. Human beings are
ultimately nothing but carriers, passageways for genes. They ride us into the ground like
race horses from generation to generation. Genes don't think about what constitutes good or evil.
They don't care whether we're happy or unhappy. We're just means to an end for them.
The only thing they think about is what is most efficient for them.
Thank you for listening and hope to see you next time.